# Financial Literacy and Stock Market Participation: Evidence From the Survey of Consumer Finances
## About the paper
This research paper was written in winter 2019/20 within the Master's seminar *Big Data in Personal Finance*. Within this repository, I analyzed the Survey of Consumer Finances 2016 with regards to the effect of financial literacy to stock market participation using R. Read the full paper here https://github.com/JRatschat/Financial-Literacy-and-Stock-Market-Participation.

## Introduction
The stockholding puzzle, pioneered in the research of Haliassos and Bertaut (1995), has gained a lot of attention by researchers. The question is why a large part of the population worldwide does not invest in stocks despite the equity premium and prefers to hold their assets in low-rate liquid assets (Haliassos & Bertaut, 1995, p. 1110). Due to the demographic shift in the population, this question has become more important in the last years. Because retirees-to-workers ratios are increasing, social security and pension systems are nowadays challenged to provide retirees with enough pensions for their daily expenses. Stocks and their long-term wealth generating potential can help retirees to not be dependent on the struggling social security and pension systems (Christelis, Georgarakos, & Haliassos, 2011, p. 1918). 

The contribution to the existing literature is that this paper analyzes the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) 2016 with regards to the effect of financial literacy to stock market participation. A new set of financial literacy questions was included in the SCF 2016 that makes it feasible to get an objective measure of financial literacy. This was not feasible in earlier series of the SCF which resulted in financial literacy either not being included in the analysis [see, e.g. (Campell, 2006); (Haliassos & Bertaut, 1995); (Malmendier & Nagel, 2011)] or being included through proxies using variables like seeking financial advice, asking friends, relatives or work contacts for financial information, whether respondent revolves more than 50 percent of their credit card limit, or the ability to understand survey questions in the SCF [see, e.g. (Christelis et al., 2011); (Huston et al., 2012); (Shum & Faig, 2006)]. While controlling for other effects like age, gender, marital status, education, log of total income, log of total financial wealth, real estate ownership, business ownership, and risk attitude, the measure of financial literacy used in this paper enables a more precise estimation of its effect on stock market participation.

## Results
Robust evidence is found that higher basic financial literacy is positively related to the decision to participate in the stock market. When adding basic financial literacy in a Probit regression model, education loses its significance except for the college or bachelor’s degree education level. Other factors that have a positive significant effect on stock market participation are being married or living with a partner, log of total income, log of total financial net wealth, and risk attitude. Business ownership has a significantly negative effect on the likelihood to hold stocks. Age significantly increases stock market participation in the 36 to 50 age group and afterwards decreases stock market participation (insignificantly in 51 to 65 age group and significantly in over 65 age group).

In the descriptive analysis, I was able to show that there is a difference of stock market participation conditional on financial literacy. Also, financial literacy proxies used in previous research like education and wealth show structural differences in stock market participation when separated in financial literacy groups. More importantly, the Probit regression analysis confirms the results that financial literacy has indeed a significant effect in the decision to participate in the stock market. Therefore, I show that a lack of financial knowledge is a significant deterrent to stock ownership.


